README.md, before:

[![Docker Pulls](https://img.shields.io/docker/pulls/panzer1119/mc-backup.svg)](https://hub.docker.com/r/panzer1119/mc-backup)
[![release](https://github.com/Panzer1119/docker-mc-backup/workflows/release/badge.svg?branch=multiarch)](https://github.com/Panzer1119/docker-mc-backup/actions?query=workflow%3Arelease)
[![Discord](https://img.shields.io/discord/660567679458869252?label=Discord&logo=discord)](https://discord.gg/DXfKpjB)

Provides a side-car container to backup itzg/minecraft-server world data.

## Environment variables

##### Common variables:

- `SRC_DIR`=/data
- `BACKUP_NAME`=world
- `INITIAL_DELAY`=2m
- `BACKUP_INTERVAL`=24h
- `PAUSE_IF_NO_PLAYERS`=false
- `PLAYERS_ONLINE_CHECK_INTERVAL`=5m
- `PRUNE_BACKUPS_DAYS`=7
- `PRUNE_RESTIC_RETENTION`=--keep-within 7d
- `SERVER_PORT`=25565
- `RCON_HOST`=localhost
- `RCON_PORT`=25575
- `RCON_PASSWORD`=minecraft
- `RCON_PASSWORD_FILE`: Can be set to read the RCON password from a file. Overrides `RCON_PASSWORD` if both are set.
- `RCON_RETRIES`=5 : Set to a negative value to retry indefinitely
- `RCON_RETRY_INTERVAL`=10s
- `EXCLUDES`=\*.jar,cache,logs
- `BACKUP_METHOD`=tar
- `RESTIC_ADDITIONAL_TAGS`=mc_backups
- `TZ` : Can be set to the timezone to use for logging

If `PRUNE_BACKUPS_DAYS` is set to a positive number, it'll delete old `.tgz` backup files from `DEST_DIR`. By default deletes backups older than a week.

If `BACKUP_INTERVAL` is set to 0 or smaller, script will run once and exit.

Both `INITIAL_DELAY` and `BACKUP_INTERVAL` accept times in `sleep` format: `NUMBER[SUFFIX] NUMBER[SUFFIX] ...`.
SUFFIX may be 's' for seconds (the default), 'm' for minutes, 'h' for hours or 'd' for days.

Examples:
- `BACKUP_INTERVAL`="1.5d" -> backup every one and a half days (36 hours)
- `BACKUP_INTERVAL`="2h 30m" -> backup every two and a half hours
- `INITIAL_DELAY`="120" -> wait 2 minutes before starting

The `PAUSE_IF_NO_PLAYERS` option lets you pause backups if no players are online.

If `PAUSE_IF_NO_PLAYERS`="true" and there are no players online after a backup is made, then instead of immediately scheduling the next backup, the script will start checking the server's player count every `PLAYERS_ONLINE_CHECK_INTERVAL` (defaults to 5 minutes). Once a player joins the server, the next backup will be scheduled in `BACKUP_INTERVAL`.

`EXCLUDES` is a comma-separated list of glob(3) patterns to exclude from backups. By default excludes all jar files (plugins, server files), logs folder and cache (used by i.e. PaperMC server).

##### `tar` backup method

- `DEST_DIR`=/backups
- `LINK_LATEST`=false
- `TAR_COMPRESS_METHOD`=gzip
- `ZSTD_PARAMETERS`=-3 --long=25 --single-thread

`LINK_LATEST` is a true/false flag that creates a symbolic link to the latest backup.

`TAR_COMPRESS_METHOD` is the compression method used by tar. Valid value: gzip bzip2 zstd

`ZSTD_PARAMETERS` sets the parameters for `zstd` compression. The `--long` parameter affects RAM requirements for both compression and decompression (the default of 25 means 2^25 bytes = 32 MB).

##### `restic` backup method

See [restic documentation](https://restic.readthedocs.io/en/latest/030_preparing_a_new_repo.html) on what variables are needed to be defined.
At least one of `RESTIC_PASSWORD*` variables need to be defined, along with `RESTIC_REPOSITORY`.

Use the `RESTIC_ADDITIONAL_TAGS` variable to define a space separated list of additional restic tags. The backup will always be tagged with the value of `BACKUP_NAME`. e.g.: `RESTIC_ADDITIONAL_TAGS=mc_backups foo bar` will tag your backup with `foo`, `bar`, `mc_backups` and the value of `BACKUP_NAME`.

You can finetune the retention cycle of the restic backups using the `PRUNE_RESTIC_RETENTION` variable. Take a look at the [restic documentation](https://restic.readthedocs.io/en/latest/060_forget.html) for details.

> **_EXAMPLE_**  
> Setting `PRUNE_RESTIC_RETENTION` to `--keep-daily 7 --keep-weekly 5 --keep-monthly 12 --keep-yearly 75` will keep the most recent 7 daily snapshots, then 4 (remember, 7 dailies already include a week!) last-day-of-the-weeks and 11 or 12 last-day-of-the-months (11 or 12 depends if the 5 weeklies cross a month). And finally 75 last-day-of-the-year snapshots. All other snapshots are removed.

:warning: | When using restic as your backup method, make sure that you fix your container hostname to a constant value! Otherwise, each time a container restarts it'll use a different, random hostname which will cause it not to rotate your backups created by previous instances!
---|---

:warning: | When using restic, at least one of `HOSTNAME` or `BACKUP_NAME` must be unique, when sharing a repository. Otherwise other instances using the same repository might prune your backups prematurely.
---|---

:warning: | SFTP restic backend is not directly supported. Please use RCLONE backend with SFTP support.
---|---

##### `rclone` backup method
Rclone acts as the `tar` backup method but automatically moves the compressed files to a remote drive via [rclone](https://rclone.org/).

There are a few special environment variables for the rclone method.

- `RCLONE_REMOTE` is the name of the remote you've configured in your rclone.conf, see [remote setup](https://rclone.org/remote_setup/).
- `RCLONE_COMPRESS_METHOD`=gzip
- `DEST_DIR`=/backups is the container path where the archive is temporarily created
- `RCLONE_DEST_DIR` is the directory on the remote

Other parameters such as `PRUNE_BACKUPS_DAYS`, `ZSTD_PARAMETERS`, and `BACKUP_NAME` are all used as well.

**Note** that you will need to place your rclone config file in `/config/rclone/rclone.conf`.
This can be done by adding it through docker-compose,

```yaml
- ./rclone.config:/config/rclone/rclone.conf:ro
```
or by running the config wizard in a container and mounting the volume.
```shell
docker run -it --rm -v rclone-config:/config/rclone rclone/rclone config
```

then you must bind the volume **for the mc-backup process**
```yaml
volumes:
  - rclone-config:/config/rclone
```
**and the service**
```yaml
volumes:
  rclone-config:
    external: true
```

##### `borg` backup method
[Borg](https://www.borgbackup.org/) deduplicates and compresses the files and stores them in a repository which can be on the local host or a remote host.
See [borg documentation](https://borgbackup.readthedocs.io/) for more information.

Borg also supports encrypted repositories, but for now it's not implemented here, therefore it creates an unencrypted repository.

There are a few special environment variables for the borg method.

- `BORG_REPO`=/borg is the path or url to the [borg repository](https://borgbackup.readthedocs.io/en/stable/usage/general.html#repository-urls)
- `BORG_COMPRESS_METHOD`=lz4 [available compression methods](https://borgbackup.readthedocs.io/en/stable/internals/data-structures.html#compression)
- `BORG_ARCHIVE_PREFIX` is the prefix that gets prepended to the borg archvie name
- `BORG_ARCHIVE_SUFFIX` is the suffix that gets appended to the borg archvie name

And some advanced environment variables, which not need to be edited, but could.

- `BORG_BASE_DIR`=/tmp/borg is the path to the borg base directory, where borg stores its cache and other data
- `BORG_RELOCATED_REPO_ACCESS_IS_OK`=yes allows borg to use the repository even if it's been relocated
- `BORG_UNKNOWN_UNENCRYPTED_REPO_ACCESS_IS_OK`=yes allows borg to use the repository even if it's unknown to it (and unencrypted), which can happen, when the borg base directory is not persisted on the host

Other parameters such as `PRUNE_BACKUPS_DAYS`, `EXCLUDES`, and `BACKUP_NAME` are all used as well.

## Volumes

- `/data` :
  Should be attached read-only to the same volume as the `/data` of the `itzg/minecraft-server` container
- `/backups` :
  The volume where incremental tgz files will be created, if using tar backup method.
- `/borg` :
  The volume where the borg repository is located, if using borg backup method and a local repository.

## On-demand backups

If you would like to kick off a backup prior to the next backup interval, you can `exec` the command `backup now` within the running backup container. For example, using the [Docker Compose example](examples/docker-compose.yml) where the service name is `backups`, the exec command becomes:

```shell
docker-compose exec backups backup now
```

This mechanism can also be used to avoid a long running container completely by running a temporary container, such as:

```shell
docker run --rm ...data and backup -v args... panzer1119/mc-backup backup now
```

## Example

### Kubernetes

An example StatefulSet deployment is provided [in this repository](test-deploy.yaml).

The important part is the containers definition of the deployment:

```yaml
containers:
  - name: mc
    image: itzg/minecraft-server
    env:
      - name: EULA
        value: "TRUE"
    volumeMounts:
      - mountPath: /data
        name: data
  - name: backup
    image: mc-backup
    imagePullPolicy: Never
    securityContext:
      runAsUser: 1000
    env:
      - name: BACKUP_INTERVAL
        value: "2h 30m"
    volumeMounts:
      - mountPath: /data
        name: data
        readOnly: true
      - mountPath: /backups
        name: backups
```

### Docker Compose

```yaml
version: '3.7'

services:
  mc:
    image: itzg/minecraft-server
    ports:
    - 25565:25565
    environment:
      EULA: "TRUE"
    volumes:
    - mc:/data
  backups:
    image: panzer1119/mc-backup
    environment:
      BACKUP_INTERVAL: "2h"
      # instead of network_mode below, could declare RCON_HOST
      # RCON_HOST: mc
    volumes:
    # mount the same volume used by server, but read-only
    - mc:/data:ro
    # use a host attached directory so that it in turn can be backed up
    # to external/cloud storage
    - ./mc-backups:/backups
    # share network namespace with server to simplify rcon access
    network_mode: "service:mc"

volumes:
  mc: {}
```

### Restic with rclone

Setup the rclone configuration for the desired remote location
```shell
docker run -it --rm -v rclone-config:/config/rclone rclone/rclone config
```

Setup the `panzer1119/mc-backup` container with the following specifics
- Set `BACKUP_METHOD` to `restic`
- Set `RESTIC_PASSWORD` to a restic backup repository password to use
- Use `rclone:` as the prefix on the `RESTIC_REPOSITORY`
- Append the rclone config name, colon (`:`), and specific sub-path for the config type

In the following example `CFG_NAME` and `BUCKET_NAME` need to be changed to specifics for the rclone configuration you created:
```yaml
version: "3"

services:
  mc:
    image: itzg/minecraft-server
    environment:
      EULA: "TRUE"
    ports:
      - 25565:25565
    volumes:
      - mc:/data
  backup:
    image: panzer1119/mc-backup
    environment:
      RCON_HOST: mc
      BACKUP_METHOD: restic
      RESTIC_PASSWORD: password
      RESTIC_REPOSITORY: rclone:CFG_NAME:BUCKET_NAME
    volumes:
      # mount volume pre-configured using a host mounted file
      - ./rclone.conf:/config/rclone/rclone.conf
      # or configure one into a named volume using
      # docker run -it --rm -v rclone-config:/config/rclone rclone/rclone config
      # and change the above to
      # - rclone-config:/config/rclone
      - mc:/data:ro
      - backups:/backup

volumes:
# Uncomment this if using the config step above
#  rclone-config:
#    external: true
  mc: {}
  backups: {}
```

Commit message:

docs(borg): add retention policy Grandfather-father-son

README.md, after:

[![Docker Pulls](https://img.shields.io/docker/pulls/panzer1119/mc-backup.svg)](https://hub.docker.com/r/panzer1119/mc-backup)
[![release](https://github.com/Panzer1119/docker-mc-backup/workflows/release/badge.svg?branch=multiarch)](https://github.com/Panzer1119/docker-mc-backup/actions?query=workflow%3Arelease)
[![Discord](https://img.shields.io/discord/660567679458869252?label=Discord&logo=discord)](https://discord.gg/DXfKpjB)

Provides a side-car container to backup itzg/minecraft-server world data.

## Environment variables

##### Common variables:

- `SRC_DIR`=/data
- `BACKUP_NAME`=world
- `INITIAL_DELAY`=2m
- `BACKUP_INTERVAL`=24h
- `PAUSE_IF_NO_PLAYERS`=false
- `PLAYERS_ONLINE_CHECK_INTERVAL`=5m
- `PRUNE_BACKUPS_DAYS`=7
- `PRUNE_RESTIC_RETENTION`=--keep-within 7d
- `SERVER_PORT`=25565
- `RCON_HOST`=localhost
- `RCON_PORT`=25575
- `RCON_PASSWORD`=minecraft
- `RCON_PASSWORD_FILE`: Can be set to read the RCON password from a file. Overrides `RCON_PASSWORD` if both are set.
- `RCON_RETRIES`=5 : Set to a negative value to retry indefinitely
- `RCON_RETRY_INTERVAL`=10s
- `EXCLUDES`=\*.jar,cache,logs
- `BACKUP_METHOD`=tar
- `RESTIC_ADDITIONAL_TAGS`=mc_backups
- `TZ` : Can be set to the timezone to use for logging

If `PRUNE_BACKUPS_DAYS` is set to a positive number, it'll delete old `.tgz` backup files from `DEST_DIR`. By default deletes backups older than a week.

If `BACKUP_INTERVAL` is set to 0 or smaller, script will run once and exit.

Both `INITIAL_DELAY` and `BACKUP_INTERVAL` accept times in `sleep` format: `NUMBER[SUFFIX] NUMBER[SUFFIX] ...`.
SUFFIX may be 's' for seconds (the default), 'm' for minutes, 'h' for hours or 'd' for days.

Examples:
- `BACKUP_INTERVAL`="1.5d" -> backup every one and a half days (36 hours)
- `BACKUP_INTERVAL`="2h 30m" -> backup every two and a half hours
- `INITIAL_DELAY`="120" -> wait 2 minutes before starting

The `PAUSE_IF_NO_PLAYERS` option lets you pause backups if no players are online.

If `PAUSE_IF_NO_PLAYERS`="true" and there are no players online after a backup is made, then instead of immediately scheduling the next backup, the script will start checking the server's player count every `PLAYERS_ONLINE_CHECK_INTERVAL` (defaults to 5 minutes). Once a player joins the server, the next backup will be scheduled in `BACKUP_INTERVAL`.

`EXCLUDES` is a comma-separated list of glob(3) patterns to exclude from backups. By default excludes all jar files (plugins, server files), logs folder and cache (used by i.e. PaperMC server).

##### `tar` backup method

- `DEST_DIR`=/backups
- `LINK_LATEST`=false
- `TAR_COMPRESS_METHOD`=gzip
- `ZSTD_PARAMETERS`=-3 --long=25 --single-thread

`LINK_LATEST` is a true/false flag that creates a symbolic link to the latest backup.

`TAR_COMPRESS_METHOD` is the compression method used by tar. Valid value: gzip bzip2 zstd

`ZSTD_PARAMETERS` sets the parameters for `zstd` compression. The `--long` parameter affects RAM requirements for both compression and decompression (the default of 25 means 2^25 bytes = 32 MB).

##### `restic` backup method

See [restic documentation](https://restic.readthedocs.io/en/latest/030_preparing_a_new_repo.html) on what variables are needed to be defined.
At least one of `RESTIC_PASSWORD*` variables need to be defined, along with `RESTIC_REPOSITORY`.

Use the `RESTIC_ADDITIONAL_TAGS` variable to define a space separated list of additional restic tags. The backup will always be tagged with the value of `BACKUP_NAME`. e.g.: `RESTIC_ADDITIONAL_TAGS=mc_backups foo bar` will tag your backup with `foo`, `bar`, `mc_backups` and the value of `BACKUP_NAME`.

You can finetune the retention cycle of the restic backups using the `PRUNE_RESTIC_RETENTION` variable. Take a look at the [restic documentation](https://restic.readthedocs.io/en/latest/060_forget.html) for details.

> **_EXAMPLE_**  
> Setting `PRUNE_RESTIC_RETENTION` to `--keep-daily 7 --keep-weekly 5 --keep-monthly 12 --keep-yearly 75` will keep the most recent 7 daily snapshots, then 4 (remember, 7 dailies already include a week!) last-day-of-the-weeks and 11 or 12 last-day-of-the-months (11 or 12 depends if the 5 weeklies cross a month). And finally 75 last-day-of-the-year snapshots. All other snapshots are removed.

:warning: | When using restic as your backup method, make sure that you fix your container hostname to a constant value! Otherwise, each time a container restarts it'll use a different, random hostname which will cause it not to rotate your backups created by previous instances!
---|---

:warning: | When using restic, at least one of `HOSTNAME` or `BACKUP_NAME` must be unique, when sharing a repository. Otherwise other instances using the same repository might prune your backups prematurely.
---|---

:warning: | SFTP restic backend is not directly supported. Please use RCLONE backend with SFTP support.
---|---

##### `rclone` backup method
Rclone acts as the `tar` backup method but automatically moves the compressed files to a remote drive via [rclone](https://rclone.org/).

There are a few special environment variables for the rclone method.

- `RCLONE_REMOTE` is the name of the remote you've configured in your rclone.conf, see [remote setup](https://rclone.org/remote_setup/).
- `RCLONE_COMPRESS_METHOD`=gzip
- `DEST_DIR`=/backups is the container path where the archive is temporarily created
- `RCLONE_DEST_DIR` is the directory on the remote

Other parameters such as `PRUNE_BACKUPS_DAYS`, `ZSTD_PARAMETERS`, and `BACKUP_NAME` are all used as well.

**Note** that you will need to place your rclone config file in `/config/rclone/rclone.conf`.
This can be done by adding it through docker-compose,

```yaml
- ./rclone.config:/config/rclone/rclone.conf:ro
```
or by running the config wizard in a container and mounting the volume.
```shell
docker run -it --rm -v rclone-config:/config/rclone rclone/rclone config
```

then you must bind the volume **for the mc-backup process**
```yaml
volumes:
  - rclone-config:/config/rclone
```
**and the service**
```yaml
volumes:
  rclone-config:
    external: true
```

##### `borg` backup method
[Borg](https://www.borgbackup.org/) deduplicates and compresses the files and stores them in a repository which can be on the local host or a remote host.
See [borg documentation](https://borgbackup.readthedocs.io/) for more information.

Borg also supports encrypted repositories, but for now it's not implemented here, therefore it creates an unencrypted repository.

There are a few special environment variables for the borg method.

- `BORG_REPO`=/borg is the path or url to the [borg repository](https://borgbackup.readthedocs.io/en/stable/usage/general.html#repository-urls)
- `BORG_COMPRESS_METHOD`=lz4 [available compression methods](https://borgbackup.readthedocs.io/en/stable/internals/data-structures.html#compression)
- `BORG_ARCHIVE_PREFIX` is the prefix that gets prepended to the borg archvie name
- `BORG_ARCHIVE_SUFFIX` is the suffix that gets appended to the borg archvie name
- `BORG_PRUNE_GFS` takes multiple arguments (separated by commas) of the form `<count><unit>` and enables the [GFS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backup_rotation_scheme#Grandfather-father-son) retention policy.\
  This retention policy will keep an `count` amount of archives in the duration of the `unit`.\
  Example: `4m,3d,2H` will keep 4 monthly, 3 daily and 2 hourly archives.\
  Available units:
  - `M` minutely
  - `H` hourly
  - `d` daily
  - `w` weekly
  - `m` monthly
  - `y` yearly

And some advanced environment variables, which not need to be edited, but could.

- `BORG_BASE_DIR`=/tmp/borg is the path to the borg base directory, where borg stores its cache and other data
- `BORG_RELOCATED_REPO_ACCESS_IS_OK`=yes allows borg to use the repository even if it's been relocated
- `BORG_UNKNOWN_UNENCRYPTED_REPO_ACCESS_IS_OK`=yes allows borg to use the repository even if it's unknown to it (and unencrypted), which can happen, when the borg base directory is not persisted on the host

Other parameters such as `PRUNE_BACKUPS_DAYS`, `EXCLUDES`, and `BACKUP_NAME` are all used as well.

## Volumes

- `/data` :
  Should be attached read-only to the same volume as the `/data` of the `itzg/minecraft-server` container
- `/backups` :
  The volume where incremental tgz files will be created, if using tar backup method.
- `/borg` :
  The volume where the borg repository is located, if using borg backup method and a local repository.

## On-demand backups

If you would like to kick off a backup prior to the next backup interval, you can `exec` the command `backup now` within the running backup container. For example, using the [Docker Compose example](examples/docker-compose.yml) where the service name is `backups`, the exec command becomes:

```shell
docker-compose exec backups backup now
```

This mechanism can also be used to avoid a long running container completely by running a temporary container, such as:

```shell
docker run --rm ...data and backup -v args... panzer1119/mc-backup backup now
```

## Example

### Kubernetes

An example StatefulSet deployment is provided [in this repository](test-deploy.yaml).

The important part is the containers definition of the deployment:

```yaml
containers:
  - name: mc
    image: itzg/minecraft-server
    env:
      - name: EULA
        value: "TRUE"
    volumeMounts:
      - mountPath: /data
        name: data
  - name: backup
    image: mc-backup
    imagePullPolicy: Never
    securityContext:
      runAsUser: 1000
    env:
      - name: BACKUP_INTERVAL
        value: "2h 30m"
    volumeMounts:
      - mountPath: /data
        name: data
        readOnly: true
      - mountPath: /backups
        name: backups
```

### Docker Compose

```yaml
version: '3.7'

services:
  mc:
    image: itzg/minecraft-server
    ports:
    - 25565:25565
    environment:
      EULA: "TRUE"
    volumes:
    - mc:/data
  backups:
    image: panzer1119/mc-backup
    environment:
      BACKUP_INTERVAL: "2h"
      # instead of network_mode below, could declare RCON_HOST
      # RCON_HOST: mc
    volumes:
    # mount the same volume used by server, but read-only
    - mc:/data:ro
    # use a host attached directory so that it in turn can be backed up
    # to external/cloud storage
    - ./mc-backups:/backups
    # share network namespace with server to simplify rcon access
    network_mode: "service:mc"

volumes:
  mc: {}
```

### Restic with rclone

Setup the rclone configuration for the desired remote location
```shell
docker run -it --rm -v rclone-config:/config/rclone rclone/rclone config
```

Setup the `panzer1119/mc-backup` container with the following specifics
- Set `BACKUP_METHOD` to `restic`
- Set `RESTIC_PASSWORD` to a restic backup repository password to use
- Use `rclone:` as the prefix on the `RESTIC_REPOSITORY`
- Append the rclone config name, colon (`:`), and specific sub-path for the config type

In the following example `CFG_NAME` and `BUCKET_NAME` need to be changed to specifics for the rclone configuration you created:
```yaml
version: "3"

services:
  mc:
    image: itzg/minecraft-server
    environment:
      EULA: "TRUE"
    ports:
      - 25565:25565
    volumes:
      - mc:/data
  backup:
    image: panzer1119/mc-backup
    environment:
      RCON_HOST: mc
      BACKUP_METHOD: restic
      RESTIC_PASSWORD: password
      RESTIC_REPOSITORY: rclone:CFG_NAME:BUCKET_NAME
    volumes:
      # mount volume pre-configured using a host mounted file
      - ./rclone.conf:/config/rclone/rclone.conf
      # or configure one into a named volume using
      # docker run -it --rm -v rclone-config:/config/rclone rclone/rclone config
      # and change the above to
      # - rclone-config:/config/rclone
      - mc:/data:ro
      - backups:/backup

volumes:
# Uncomment this if using the config step above
#  rclone-config:
#    external: true
  mc: {}
  backups: {}
```
